Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lobs and
today I'm joined by Doctor Marina Dubova. She's a
um a nomi poststructural fellow at the Santa Fe
Institute, and today we're talking about her work related
to the cognitive mechanisms of discovery and also the
cognitive foundations of the scientific method. So, Doctor Dubova,
welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thanks so much for inviting me.
OK, so, uh, first of all, what is discovery
and how do you approach such a topic?
Yeah, that's a great question. Uh, I typically think
of discovery in a cognitive way. So, I think
of science in general as a cognitive activity of
how we as humans try to make sense of
the world. Um, SO in that way, uh, science
is a cognitive process and it's just, uh, and
it's characterized by many subprocesses that we often distinguish
in any cognitive system. For example, that would include
how We observe the world, how we experiment or
actively, uh, investigate the world around us, uh, how
do we represent the world based on our observations?
How do we categorize the world or like, uh,
parse the world into multiple parts? Uh, HOW do
we communicate with others? How do we know who
to learn from, uh, from the community? Uh, AND
how do we use flexible analogies to guide our
thinking and to notice similarities between different observations. So
all of these subprocesses, I believe, guide scientific process
just as much as they guide human learning or
animal learning or other systems learning in the world.
Yes, I mean, I invited you because I've never
read, or, or I, or I mean, I've had
other discussions about the cognitive foundations of science on
the show, but it's always interesting to discuss this
a little bit further because I've also had people
on the show to talk about the sociology of
science, the philosophy of science, and all of that
because, uh, I mean, to If we want to
be rigorous about science as an institution, we have
to approach it as a human activity with all
of our biases, our cognitive limitations, the fact that
it operates within a particular cultural context, and all
of that. I mean, it's not just a pure
way that is not unbiased, that is not. Is
the role of discovering the truth with a capital
T or something like that, right?
Absolutely, and, uh, as you mentioned, there are a
lot of people who have recognized this aspect of
science, the fact that all our knowledge is human
knowledge, it's limited, it's subject to very similar biases
that we have in general as humans. It's not
a magical activity that can lead us to Uh,
objective knowledge about the world, no matter what, no
matter what we do, uh, if we just follow
exactly the methods that science prescribes to us, we
can, we, we still cannot transcend the inherent limitations
of science as an activity, as a human activity
as we know it.
Yeah, so what are then the cognitive mechanisms of
discovery?
Yeah, as I mentioned, these are all different mechanisms
that we use to try to understand the world
around us. This includes trying to observe the world,
categorizing the world into parts, or trying to parse
the world in some other different ways, uh, representing
the world with different types of models or theories.
Um, And, uh, things like analogies, making flexible connections
between observations or models, uh, or different ways of
understanding the world, interacting with other people. All of
these are different cognitive mechanisms of discovery, uh, and
These have been to some degree appreciated by philosophers
and sociologists of science to some extent, but now
we can also start to make the connection to
cognitive sciences, which has studied these exact same processes,
uh, in kind of in more detail exactly how
humans, uh, do these things in their everyday life.
So then, I mean, adding a cognitive science perspective
to all of these, uh, we can include it
in a sort of multidisciplinary approach to understand how
science as an institution really works and how we
produce. Scientific knowledge, correct?
Yeah, and ideally we could, uh, I, at least
that's my hope is that we can also think
about how we could improve science by thinking about
it more concretely in terms of some of these
processes and how they work in certain contexts. Uh,
AND we can start applying cognitive methods, the methods
we have traditionally used to study, uh, for example,
human learning to better understand learning in the context
of science. For example, we can start using, or
we can use more cognitive experiments with scientists where
we try to ask scientists to learn about certain
toy system where we can set up exactly what
is there for them, for them to learn and
see what kind of strategies they actually use, and
we can kind of scale this approach to study.
Many different scientists at different career stages and what
kind of approaches they take and whether that helps
them learn about the toy system. Uh, WE can
also start modeling the process in the same way
we model learning in general, uh, or maybe with
some modifications, but the general approach is kind of,
uh, very similar where we can apply computational models
to basically probe which kinds of strategies, uh, really
help. Agents or scientists, uh, learn about the world
in different conditions and that, that way we can
hopefully, uh, open up the possibility of finding other
strategies that have been so far, different strategies than
the ones that have been already considered in science
and learning that they may be the ones that
help, could help us learn about the world. That's
kind of the hope at least.
Yes, and I mean, I don't know if you
will agree exactly what, with what I'm going to
say, but from my conversations, as I said, with
sociologists of science, philosophers of science, and cognitive science,
scientists, what I took from all of that is
that we should think about scientific knowledge as a
human construct. I mean, we're not really through science
arriving at objective truth or About or or at
objective reality. I mean, it's always ultimately a construct,
correct?
Absolutely, I completely agree with that, and uh again,
cognitive perspective just adds to that a little bit,
uh, but yes, science is an inherently human activity.
Of course, we are making active progress in learning
useful knowledge about the world, uh, but it doesn't
mean we are arriving at one. One true model
or one true theory about how the world actually
works. I, I completely agree with that and I
think some of my favorite philosophy literature is the
literature that kind of makes, makes this point very
clear.
So what would you say are then the cognitive
foundations of the scientific method?
I mean, uh, these, I would say would be
the strategies we typically tend to prescribe or use
when we go about, uh, scientific process. This could
include some strategies or hunches or method methodological foundations
that we prescribe to students when they try to
design their experiments or some specific, uh, preferences that
We suggest, uh, students or scientists should have when
they're designing new models or new representations of the
world. So these would be all the foundations or
the strategies that we, uh, tend to, uh, tend
to follow when we, uh, when we do science.
And of course, these are very versatile, very diverse.
Nobody is really following any one of these prescriptions
perfectly well. Uh, BUT we can start kind of
analyzing at least what are the typical, typical strategies
that we as human scientists at least try to,
uh, try to adhere to when we learn about
the world. Mhm.
Yeah, that, that's, that's very interesting, but I mean,
because this is also something that I've talked about
with philosophers of science. When you approach the cognitive
foundations of the scientific method, are you approaching the
scientific method itself as one single thing, or do
you think there are scientific methods out there and
they vary depending on the scientific discipline we are
approaching.
Absolutely. I think there's a lot of diversity in
scientific methods and different disciplines could definitely have different
perspectives on how they are, uh, most effectively learning
about the world, what would be the best approaches.
Uh, ACTUALLY being here at the Santa Fe Institute.
Really gives me an opportunity to observe this firsthand
because I can interact both with physicists and philosophers
and sociologists and anthropologists. And this really highlights this
diversity of approaches that 1 may have about learning
about the world. Uh, AND I would say there
is Again, there's so much diversity, but there's also
some things that tend to reoccur in at least
some sciences where scientists do tend to have an
intuition about what kind of model is a good
illuminating model, for example, or what kind of experiment
ideally, uh, might be a good experiment. And some
of these we can trace, we can potentially speculate
what the history of these preferences would be. For
example, uh, when, uh, in social sciences or in
psychology, we often look Look up to sciences like
physics where we may inadvertently try to adopt the
methods that may not be perfectly suited for the
subject matter. So I think there's both a lot
of diversity and also some convergence among scientists, scientists
on uh what things we should do.
So what do we know, because this is something
you've studied, uh, what do we know about how
scientists go about choosing new experiments to perform?
Yeah, this is a, a fascinating question to me.
I really love, uh, thinking about it. Uh, I
think we, we know a lot of, a lot
about how in specific, uh, historical cases, what really
happened and why specific scientists may have chosen a
specific experiment to perform or to pay attention to.
Uh, WE also know on a large scale, uh,
what kind of Large scale patterns we can detect
in the, uh, publications, for example, of scientists, how
they go about exploring this knowledge landscape of what
things they could add on to. Um, BUT something
we were interested in is not only kind of
reiterating the existence of potentially some of these strategies,
but to also Test when, uh, and in what
situations they actually help our learning, uh, help the
learning of the agents about the world just as
science is. So basically what we did, uh, in
the study specifically, we took some of the canonical
examples of, um, scientific experimental strategies that have been
discussed either in methodology of science, philosophy and history
of science, or scient metrics. That may or may
not, that are not always the exact strategies that
scientists follow, but at least some of the strategies
that we know as gold standards and that we
sometimes try to perform, these include the ideas of,
for example, falsification-driven experiment. The idea that a good
experiment is really this rigorous test of the dominant
theory in the field where we design the experiment
specifically to aim to falsify the theory that we
currently have. And that's very, uh, Very prominent idea
in many sciences. The other experimentation strategy is, um,
driven by, uh, this conception of crucial experimentation by
La Kato. Uh, FOR example, in this case, uh,
the idea is that a good experiment is the
one that tries to, um, resolve a disagreement in
the, uh, in the theories in, in the given
field. So, for example, if there are multiple dominant
theories in the field, we need to design an
experiment. The perfectly identi uh that is, uh, kind
of in that space where two different theories give
divergent predictions. So, that's a really good informative experiment
compared to running the experiments where maybe two theories
are giving very similar predictions. Even though these, these
are just examples of these canonical strategies that we
sometimes think about as scientists on when we are
designing our experiments because they seem like a really
good, good approach. Uh, IT has also been recorded
that many scientists or hypothesized that sometimes scientists do
exactly the opposite, where we actually design an experiment
in such a way that Kind of, um, that
makes it more likely that our favorite theory ends
up being proven correct again and again. So that's
more of a confirmation driven strategy, and we know
that also happens in the practice of science.
But I mean, are some of those ways of
approaching experimentation, I mean, should they be ditched, for
example, do you think that when, even when people
with their own biases design an experiment where it
leads to, or, or it's designed in the way
to try to Uh, basically validate their ideas or
their hypothesis. Do you think that that's bad, uh,
methodology, or that can also be valuable in some
way?
I, I think both are true. Uh, I think
it depends on the context, and of course there's
a lot of, uh, I mean, interestingly, in the,
um, In the methodology of science literature, at least
in my field in uh cognitive psychology, it's often
considered that confirmation-driven approach is, is supposed to be,
is intuitively feels bad versus falsification-driven or crucial experimentation
or disagreement, uh, driven experimentation seems like the most
rigorous way we could do, uh, science, and that's
what many cognitive psychologists are ideally striving to. Um,
SOMETHING we have been interested in is actually testing
in a model which one of these strategies would
lead to more successful learning, and of course, we
can define more successful learning in different ways, uh,
and of course, we had to make certain assumptions
when, uh, designing a model, but that kind of
helped us learn which strategy actually is the one
that leads to a more successful learning about the
world, at least in the context which we studied.
Right. Uh, WHAT is, what does it mean for
experimentation to be theory motivated and should it be
theory motivated?
Yeah, that's, uh, I mean, all of our experimentation
is, uh, theory driven in some way, so we
construct even the space of possible experiments, we conceive
of the space of possible experiments we could do
based on our theories or conceptualizations of the world.
However, even among the strategies I just mentioned, Uh,
that we are currently Discussing in science, there are
ones that are more guided by theory, which we
are deliberately trying to use our theories to guide
specific selection of, uh, experimental conditions, and the other
strategies that may be less theory, uh, theory motivated
or more exploratory. For example, uh, ideas of, uh,
constructing an experiment to confirm one's theory or falsify
one's theory, or, uh, to resolve a theoretical disagreement
could be considered. And and deliberately theory motivated strategy
where on top of everything else that theory provides
for us to even conceive of an experiment, we're
also trying to pick the certain experimentation conditions that
are, that are guided and driven, uh, motivated by
the specific theoretical predictions that a given theory is
producing. Uh, BUT a, a different strategy, more exploratory
strategy could be something like just simply choosing. Uh,
AND experimental manipulation by random choice. So once we
have conceived of the space of possible experiments, uh,
it doesn't matter what the theory says, it doesn't
matter what two theories and where they disagree, uh,
it's more important to just choose whatever, uh, whatever
experiment, uh, we can do it by random or
try to do some kind of novelty-driven sampling where
we try to Uh, design experiments that are as
different as possible from other experiments we've done. In
that case, theory itself places a slightly lesser role
in design in our choice of design of an
experiment, and that's kind of what we call less
theory-driven experiments in our, um, in our, um, in
our simulation that we have mentioned. What we have
found in that study is that If we basically
run this model of agents who are trying to
learn about the world and who are designing experiments
based on one of these strategies, uh, and who
are basically trying to, uh, create representations of the
world based on their experimental observations. So the goal
is to create a good theory for these agents,
and good in the sense means either a theory
that can predict the world, uh, predict the ground
truth very well, or, uh, the theory that can
Um, account for as much information in the world
as possible. So these would be our two, metrics
of success in this case. We basically found that
the agents who are, uh, driven by more exploratory
strategies such as simply randomly choosing what kind of
experiment to do or, uh, using some kind of
novelty considerations. Uh, THESE were the agents who ended
up learning the most predictive and informative theories about
the world, whereas the agents who are following this
more theory guided, um, strategies such as false even
falsification or crucial experimentation, were the ones that inadvertently
narrowed themselves down to a certain aspect of the,
of the world, and they, they thought that they
would be developing very good theories because they limited
the range of observations they are learning from. So,
in that case, uh, it turned out that there's
this very interesting illusion of a theoretical success that
was emerging. So, if the experimentation strategy is guiding
you to narrow down the set of observations that
you're learning from, you may think, you, you may
have less information to even explain. Therefore, leading to
potentially, uh, leading you to potentially conceive of your
theory as being more successful just because once we
evaluate scientific success, we can only, um, We can
only look up, look up at the things that
we currently know. For example, if I try to
evaluate the success of psychology right now, I would
look mostly at the current observations that we know
as scientists and how well our theories are accounting
for these observations. So, from that perspective, these agents
who were very theories Driven, even the ones who
were trying to falsify, um, the, uh, theories by
their experiments were the ones that were collecting more
limited data for themselves to learn from, leading to
this illusion of having successfully explained the world when
in fact, you cannot actually generalize to the ground
truth that you're trying to, try to learn about.
OK, but how would randomization work in experimentation? I
mean, how would experimenters or researchers randomize experimentation?
I mean, that's a great question, and I think
that kind of goes into uh this other aspect
I mentioned of we, we tried all of, all
of these idealized strategies. Obviously, nobody can ever execute
these strategies precisely. Uh, EVEN perfect falsification is also
impossible. We would always be swayed by these different
other aspects or by our inability to perfectly Perfectly
assess what would be ideal falsification case for a
theory and things like that. In the same way,
perfectly random strategy is never possible. Uh, WE always
are guided by all kinds of, uh, all kinds
of both theoretical considerations that are already guiding our
experimentation, but also we are also, uh, guided by
costs and other practical things that make it sometimes
very, uh, Potentially even uh not beneficial to conduct
these kinds of more exploratory experiments when we as
human beings may have more trouble, for example, to
even connect these findings to other things that we
know, which would make, make it cognitively costly, for
example, to conduct these more exploratory experiments. What I
would suggest it's more, um, What I would suggest
is more uh kind of nuanced position where there
are different trade-offs that are associated with different experimentation
strategies and we should just be not, uh, be
aware of this, this possible vicious cycle, uh, which
may be introduced if we are following a theory-driven
experimentation, and I believe any increase in the how
much exploration we are allowing in our experiments. Uh,
WOULD make us more robust to these kinds of,
uh, vicious traps that we have uncovered in our
stimulation. So, for example, in a given experiment, if
I have a choice, In a given situation, to
either specifically, deliberately pre-plan all of the variables and
how they're going to behave in my experiment, versus
if I just let it, let it be more
exploratory choice, where I don't perfectly pre-plan everything, I
believe that uh more exploratory choice would be more
on the side of these agents who were randomly,
uh, selecting their experiments. So, I believe that's, that's
kind of one. Uh, KIND of minor way in
which we can alter our experimentation day to day
by making some of the small choices that we
make potentially more exploratory. So, it doesn't mean we
should always be satisfied that none, none of our
experiments are ever perfectly random or I don't know
if we even want that, but there's always choices
that we make that could be made more or
less exploratory, and this, uh, this study kind of
speaks for the value of more exploratory studies.
So another topic I would like to ask you
about, what is concept-laden evidence?
Yeah, that's a very related topic, of course. Um,
THIS is something we thought about, uh, kind of
again inspired by the philosophy literature that is pointing
out the theory ladenness of scientific observation and how
all of the things, all of the data that
we are collecting actually is not neutral or pure
or theory-free. It's always ingrained with our way, the
ways we, in which we are conceptualizing the world.
So, what we try to do with uh my
advisor, Rob Goldstone, We try to think about the
ways in which concepts, specifically the ways we carve
the world into multiple parts. For example, in human,
uh, in human life, it could be carving the
continuous color spectrum into discrete categories such as red
and orange and blue in one culture or some
other categorization in the other culture. Um, IN the
science, it would be creating scientific taxonomies where we
kind of carve our phenomena into multiple parts. Uh,
THIS would, the example of this would be, for
example, in the human cognitive psychology, we conceive of
human mind as consisting of multiple processes such as
attention, perception, memory. Memory is divided into long-term memory,
short-term memory, working memory, and things like that. So
all of these are conceptualizations that we impose onto
our phenomena of interest. So, the, we suggest in
this paper that our, uh, evidence that we're collecting
is influenced by these concepts or taxonomies that we
are, uh, that we have when we are approaching
the, the subject matter. So, uh, specifically, we are
trying to say, uh, we're trying to make a
case in the paper that, um, A lot of
the ways in which we have already noticed in
human cognitive psychology that our concepts of the world
often influence our perception of the world. For example,
having different color color categorizations may influence how, uh,
we, we would be perceptually discriminating different colors if
we come from different cultures. Um, IN the same
way, we're saying that Uh, some of the same
mechanisms may affect how concepts, these concepts in which
we divide the world into parts may affect scientific
experimentation, scientific theory building, uh, and, uh, scientific reassessment
of the evidence in such a way that may
sometimes instantiate these, these categories even when we're trying
to reassess them. Uh, I can talk more about
this, but that's kind of the big picture.
I mean, would that be one of the reasons
why cognitive and cultural diversity in science is important?
Because, I mean, people from different, uh, cultural and
cognitive backgrounds perhaps have something to add that if
we only add, for example, people from Uh, countries
where the, the dominant psychologies, to use Joseph Eric's
terms, uh, weird psychology, that would be limiting in
a way.
Absolutely, I think there are so many ways in
which, uh, cultural diversity and in general, uh, epistemic,
any kind of theoretical diversity in science, I believe,
should be encouraged. Uh, THE main reason for this
is that we bring all of this historical and
cultural baggage with us when we construct. Uh, OUR
conceptualizations of the world, even as, as scientists, and
science is not this magical way to basically transcend
all our, all of our human cognitive limitations and
human conceptualizations that we, uh, we have been, uh,
ingrained with over, over the course of our lives.
Uh, AND actually what we, uh, what many people
have noticed is that a lot of scientific taxonomies
are trait, have their traces in the folk taxonomies
of a given. Uh, OFTEN Western cultures. Uh, SO
for example, uh, the way in which, again, we
think about human cognitive, uh, cognitive processes, a lot
of these, uh, these concepts trace their roots in,
uh, in the Western conceptualization, uh, conceptualizations of how
humans work, uh, even before psychology was created. Uh,
IN fact, I think It's not just about the
concepts, but it's also about the ways in which
we approach the world and represent the world, and
it has been documented in a cross cultural psychology
that there's a lot of variation in which people,
uh, from different cultures, uh, might be even approaching,
uh, the, this activity of learning about the world.
For example, Douglas Mine and Megan Bang and other
have, others have done a lot of beautiful work
on How, uh, native, uh, native people's conceptualizations of
nature actually sometimes are more consistent with the complexity
view where you consider all of the things to
be interrelated with each other as compared to kind
of Western, uh, way of thinking about the world
when we try to, sometimes it seems like we're
trying to really Consider every variable in isolation and
which one is really affecting the, the target, uh,
target phenomenon, uh, and these are different high-level strategies
in which we can even, uh, approach to learn
about the world and some of them, them may
or may not be, uh, more useful or all
of them are useful, and we need to really,
uh, see where each approach would, would lead us.
Mhm.
Yeah, uh, no, I definitely have had several conversations
on the show about that. For example, I've interviewed
Doctor Richard Nisbett about the cognitive differences between Westerners
and Eastern Asians, and Eastern Asians, for example, tend
to be more holistic in their thinking, more relational,
and, uh, and, uh, I mean, approaches to, uh,
science in the East tend, uh, are more easily
favored, for example, a process. Ontology instead of a
substance ontology and then there are work of people
uh that unfortunately is not very mainstream in the
cognitive sciences and psychology yet, but there are people
applying complexity science and dynamical systems theory specifically to
psychology and cognitive science. I mean, I've interviewed people
like Naomi Reuter and Paul van Gert from the
Netherlands and they are doing fantastic work in that
domain and Um, yeah, I, I mean, it's just
that there are ways of thinking that perhaps are
harder for people who were brought up in the
Western culture.
Absolutely, and I think what like this cognitive approach
could add onto this is basically we can say,
oh, these are the specific differences we have noticed
and how people Approach they're learning about the world
in these different countries. For example, that could include
more holistic and relational thinking versus more, uh, kind
of reductionist thinking, uh, and of course, we are
not making a point that one of them is
better than another, but it's very important to understand
where some of our aspects of our existing science
are coming from, whether it's really the world speaking
to us and being all of, like, being, uh,
Kind of um Being Isomorphic to the structures that
we typically use to think about the world versus
if, if, if that's really our cognitive limitations and
our cognitive predispositions are, are that we are imposing
onto the world, and I think both could be
possible and it's very important to kind of document
some of these differences, some of these possible differences,
uh, and to think about, um, how we could
Assess which, which aspect was uh in play, uh,
when a certain piece of evidence has been gathered.
Of course that can never be achieved in perfect
form, but I think just recognizing the differences is
the first step.
I mean, at least in the Western tradition, I
think we've known at the very least since Kant
that the pure empiricist approach, I mean that we
should assume that we just receive pure information without
any. The cognitive filters from the world and process
it just doesn't work and isn't true, right?
Absolutely. I think in philosophy it has been recognized
for a very long time and I think many
scientists are aware of this, but I think when
it comes to very specific Day to day parts
of doing science, we somehow, often they're still, at
least in cognitive psychology, I feel like I personally
have been trained with this kind of mindset and
others have been trained, even though we do know
there are these biases that affect our cognition, still,
we, we think that we're learning this, uh, ideally,
the ideal is to find this one theory that
really explains the phenomenon and we often have these
fights over Attention and memory and attention and perception,
these are really the modules of cognition. Um, BASED
on, uh, based on looking at some of the
evidence when we don't really go into depth about
how this evidence has been collected in the first
place and how this evidence that we're using to
justify again and again that perception and attention are
different processes might have been collected with these conceptualizations
in mind where there are different cognitive psychology communities
that are studying these different processes and it's really,
really hard to Backtrack and say, oh, let's just
look at the data and see if perception and
attention are re-emerging as kind of joints of the
mind, uh, when we have used them, uh, for
our entire activity. It's kind of hard to, uh,
appreciate that in the moment sometimes.
OK, so let me ask you about another topic
that you've explored in your work, uh, because many
times, and I still hear this from many scientists,
we assume that parsimony is always better and that
we should always apply the parsimon. On the principle
or we should apply something like Occam's razor to
science that is the, the most, uh, the simplest
uh explanation with the fewest assumptions. It is always
the better, that's the assumption. Um, I mean, is
this, is the parsimony principle always the best to
apply in science?
Um, I think it's not always the best, and
it depends on the context, uh, and in fact,
something I'm very interested in is kind of mapping.
When and in which situations parsimony is the useful
principle for a learning agent to learn about the
world and when is it not a useful principle
and again, that's where some of the cognitive, uh,
studies of other types of learners, for example, either
human learners learning about the world when we can
assess the progress or we can look at the
machines or artificial learners who are trying to learn
about the set of data and we can basically
manipulate. How, uh, what the degree of the parsimony
bias they have when they're trying to learn a
representation of the data, and we have some really
interesting recent results from computer science and statistical learning
that basically is speaking. Against at least the most
naive intuition that always just having trying to compress
the data into a smallest number of components or
at least relatively small number of components is always
the best. So, basically, some of these recent results,
it's um called the double descent of generalization error.
So, basically, when we think about scientific uh statistical
representation learning, Let's say we're trying to create either
a linear model with multiple parameters to capture the
set of data, or we can think about a
neural autoencoder, kind of, uh, there's an input data
of a, of a given dimensionality and output data
of a given dimensionality, and the goal is to
construct a representation to capture as much of, as
much of the structure in the data as possible.
So when we think of these systems, uh, we
can basically vary the degree, at least of the
parsimony that they are. Originally, uh, originally created with.
So in this case, we can, for example, say
this neural autoencoder could have a bigger bottleneck where
they're only one neuron, one single neuron that all
the information is passing through, or the linear model
could have just one parameter to account for all
the variants in the data. Uh, THE other option
would be, uh, to increase the number of neurons
that are, that are capturing the information and the
data, uh, or the, to increase the amount of
parameters of this regression model. And traditionally we have
thought that increasing this number of parameters contra or
very intuitively, it basically, uh, Increases our, uh, risk
of overfitting the data, overfitting the noise in the
data. So basically, the idea is that by compressing
the data, we find really the things that truly
matter and we rule out all the noise and
everything else in our everyday observations. So, uh, none
of the observations are exactly the same, so it's
useful to, when you're constructing a representation to basically
rule out all of this, uh, noise as much
as possible to capture only the important elements of
it. Uh, AND that's kind of one of the
arguments for parsimony is that we, we basically aim
right away to rule out all the noise in
the data and, uh, try not to overfit this
noise in our representations because that would be not
useful, not generalizable. We cannot reuse that representation to
guide our behavioral new situations. But, uh, something, uh,
some the literature that I find really fascinating is
this literature in statistical learning on double descent, which
basically finds that this picture is not as straightforward
as we thought. So basically, it turns out if
you start increasing, for example, the number of parameters
in the linear model or the number of um
neurons in the autoencoder, well beyond the point where
the model can perfectly account for literally everything in
the data, so now the, the error of the
model is basically zero on the data. And now
we keep increasing the number of parameters. For example,
that would constitute learning a polynomial regression with 1000
parameters to account for 20 observations or learning an
autoencoder with 1000 inner neurons to account for 10
dimensional data. This sounds like a really ridiculous concept.
Why do we imply, why do we construct this
map that is potentially more dimensional than the data
itself? But what people tend to find in statistical
learning literature is that actually, these end up often
being the representations that generalize the best, which is,
uh, from some perspective could be considered very counterintuitive,
where basically you're creating the representation that is at
least more rich than the data itself. This representation
is already memorizing every single data point and has
many more degrees of freedom. Then needed to capture
this data, uh, but this representation ends up generalizing
very well. And of course, there is a lot
of, uh, very interesting technical literature trying to explain
why this happens and why it may again go
back to this, uh, traditional trade-off between parsimony and
complexity. Is there some notion of parsimony that emerges
there in that regime, but what we are, we're
interested in is thinking about how this mode of
learning in general. What it could teach us about
this universal preference for parsimony. At least what this
is showing us is that there are modes of
learning that seem to be at least incompatible, partially
incompatible with our traditional notions of how parsimony should
be imposed on learning about the world, that nevertheless
lead one to learn a very successful representation of
the world, at least very useful for generalizing and
predicting, and we can ask whether that representation is
useful for other epistemic goals we can have.
OK, so one last question slash topic I would
like to explore here and it is very much
related to the previous one, because of course in
science, we can't represent reality itself, or at least
I think that's not possible. We always have to
model reality. Uh, I mean, I, I think this
is sort of almost the reverse of my previous
question. I mean, are more complex models better?
I mean, I think it depends on the context.
It depends on what are the observations we are
learning from. Uh, THERE are different, uh, goals in
which complex models could serve us a really good
role in originally exploring many, many patterns that may
be there in the data that we could eventually
distill into a couple of intuitive, uh, principles that
we can comprehend. Um, SO these are the areas
that have been explored, again, in computer science literature.
It's called, uh, distilled learning, for example, where often,
There's a stage of learning in which constructing this
very, very complex representation or a very high dimensional
representation is actually useful, even if the goal eventually
is to come up with just a couple of
parsimon just a parsimonious model with two variables. So
basically, uh, if you learn the parsimonious model directly
from the data, it often ends up not being
as successful as the model of the same data
that is learned from this higher dimensional representation of
the data we can learn first. So that's kind
of hinting at a possibility of using more complex
models at a different stage of the scientific process
where we, even if our goal is eventually to
come up with a very, uh, intuitively understandable, uh,
representation of the phenomenon, maybe the first stage usefully
might be constructing this higher dimensional representation of it
that might be more complex than the phenomenon that's
that even the data, uh, at least of the
phenomenon. Uh, SO I think Uh, back to your
question, I think it's context dependent, depends on, uh,
what we're trying to achieve in science, but I
do feel like there, there are contexts in which
complex models could be usefully utilized, and it is.
It is a limitation of science if we don't
make use of this uh mode of learning.
OK, so Doctor Dubova, just before we go, would
you like to tell people where they can find
you and your work on the internet?
Yeah, totally. Uh, PEOPLE can go to my, uh,
Google Scholar profile or my website. It's M Duboba.com.
Uh, THERE'S a lot of summaries of my research
and some of the papers, and of course I'm
always happy to answer any questions that somebody may
have over email, for example.
OK, great. So thank you so much for taking
the time to come on the show and for
the fascinating conversation.
Thank you so much for inviting me.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolati, Gabriel Pancortez or
Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, and
Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke
Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams,
Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior.
Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy,
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular,
Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks
to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink,
Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al Nick
Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.